---
layout: default
title: "Sound and Synthesis"
toc: true
---

# What is hearing?

Hearing is a physiological sensation. It is the perception of sound, of changes
in air pressure. When changes in air pressure reach us, our ears observe the
changes. Our ears send their observations to the brain, and the brain then
construct a model to describe the sound that was observed. So sounds are changes
in air pressure, but these changes are produced by the vibration of some object,
such as tuning fork or the strings of a piano. When an object vibrates it
propagates throughout the surrounding medium---air or water. We call these
propagations waves.

<!--[![longitudinal-waves-water](http://www.acs.psu.edu/drussell/Demos/waves/Water-2016.gif)](http://www.acs.psu.edu/drussell/demos.html)-->
<!--![spherical-pressure-waves](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/82/Spherical_pressure_waves.gif)-->

# What are waves?

A wave is simply some kind of oscillation---a repetitive motion---accompanied by
a transfer in energy through a medium. There are two main categories of waves:
mechanical and electromagnetic. Mechanical waves move energy through a medium by
displacing the medium, and longitudinal (compression) waves displace the medium
in the same direction as the direction of propagation. Sound waves are these
kinds of waves, and we know the oscillations which create sound waves as
vibrations.

<!--![wave]({{ "assets/post-2017-04-19/wave.gif" | relative_url }})-->

# What is sound?

In his book *Musimathics, the mathematical foundations of music*, Gareth Loy
describes mechanical waves as "organized traveling disturbances in a medium,
such as air" which and "transmit energy without transmitting matter"[^1]. By
organized, Loy means that sounds waves have characteristic shapes and properties
with which we can identify the propagator, i.e. the source of the sound.

One major property of sound waves is the rate of the number of displacements
per second, or frequency. As musicians, we call this property pitch. For
example, the sound we know as concert A is defined as having a frequency of
four-hundred and forty oscillations per second, or 440 Hz. A sound is also much
more than just its frequency; other properties include the amplitude or
intensity, the speed of sound (767 miles-per-hour in air, 3320 miles-per-hour in
water), and direction.

<!--![oboe](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4f/Oboe_modern.jpg)-->

# Timbre

So sounds have many distinguishing properties, frequency being one of them. But
probably the most distinguishing property to a given sound is timbre. Timbre
represents the tone "color" or "quality" of a sound and provides an identity to
the source of a sound. When identifying the unique tone of an instrument or of
someone's voice, timbre is the main identifying characteristic. When mapped out,
timbre can be seen as the shape of the wave, also known as the waveform.

<!--![waveforms](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/77/Waveforms.svg)-->

# Waveforms

When describing different kinds of sounds, the waveform of a sound can be
described as the pressure per second (pressure from the sound of the wave). All
sounds has waveforms, and different instruments can have very distinct wave
forms. Sounds can also have consistently periodic waveforms while others might
not. For example, when talking the human voice produces an incredibly variety of
different waveforms to produce different phonetic sounds, while an instrument
like a flute maintains a consistent waveform that makes it easily
distinguishable as being a flute.

And wave forms get fairly complex. Despite their complexity however, most
waveforms can be thought as being the sum of many simpler waveforms. It's
notion---that from simple waveforms we can create complex waveforms and thus
complex sounds---that led to the birth of synthesis.

<!--![waveform-modulation](http://www.wirebiters.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/am-modulation.jpg)-->

# What is synthesis?

> synthesize (sĭnˈthĭ-sīzˌ)
>
> v. to form (a material or abstract entity) by combining parts or elements

Synthesis is the construction of complex waveforms using basic waveforms.
Some of the simplest waveforms are the following:

- Sine (sinusoid)
- Triangle
- Square
- Saw-tooth

By adding waveforms together, we can construct complex waveforms. This is known
as additive synthesis. We can also subtract waveforms from one another, and this
is known as subtractive synthesis.

<!--![juno](http://cms.rolandus.com/assets/images/products/gallery/juno_stage_angle_gal.jpg)-->

# Synthesizers

A synthesizer, or synth, is a machine that creates sounds by performing these
additive and subtractive synthesis techniques, but more people know them as
electronic instruments. Synths come in a extremely wide variety and with many
components and modules such as voltage controlled oscilators, filters and
amplifiers, low frequency oscilators, envelope generators, noise generators,
etc.

Another distinction in the world of synthesizers is analog and digital. Analog
meaning using analog circuits and signals that vary continuously in signal
levels (think "how many numbers are there between 0 and 1: infinite"), versus
digital meaning discrete signal values (think "how many numbers are 0 and 1:
just two"). Digital synths can also be entirely emulated on computers via
software, e.g. synthesizer patches for DAWs.

<!--![noise-toaster](http://musicfromouterspace.com/analogsynth_new/NOISETOASTER/images/NOISETOASTER_faceplateforpage_comp.jpg)-->

# Do it yourself synths

Just as Apple the company was founded in a garage, so were many analog
synthesizers producers. One such inventor was Don Buchla, creator of the
Buchla synthesizer.

But what about for the average hobbyist today?

- [MFOS: Music from outer
  space](http://musicfromouterspace.com/index.php?MAINTAB=HOME&VPW=1024&VPH=500)

  Popular DIY synth website with a massive amount of open source projects out
  there to experiment with.

- [MFOS Noise
  Toaster](http://musicfromouterspace.com/index.php?MAINTAB=SYNTHDIY&VPW=1356&VPH=509)

  A fairly analog simple synthesizer project featured in the Maker Shed book
  [Make: Analog Synthesizers](https://www.makershed.com/products/make-analog-synthesizers)

<!--![buchla](https://www.sequencer.de/blog/wp-content/uploads/2012/08/Buchla-FirstPatch.jpeg)-->

# Inspiration

- [Make Noise](http://www.makenoisemusic.com/)
  - [0-Coast Demo (Krell patch)](https://youtu.be/5FW8QYt6bio?t=18m34s)

- [Nebulophone](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2jjp_31kbpY)

# Sources

[^1]: _Musimathics_, Gareth Loy. MIT Press, 2011.
